# **Keyboard Plus**

## **Description**

K-plus is tool for enabling layers on non-mechanical keyboards that don't usually have access to alternate layouts. K-plus is built on [AutoHotKey Script v2-beta](https://lexikos.github.io/v2/docs/AutoHotkey.htm) and is therefore primarily a Windows tool. 

It's designed to be configurable and flexible; supporting as many layers as you'd like to include. Once configured, a compiled version can easily be carried on a flash drive and run on any Windows device, letting you move your layers between devices.

While configuration is a little complex, it sacrifices simplicity for versatility. K-plus supports layer toggling, AHK's version of chords (usable on their own, or as global modifiers), multipress options, and dead keys (though the implementation is a little hacky). 

If you just want some simple remapped layers (for programming for example) skip to [Remapping](#remapping)

## **Table of Contents**


* [Installation](#installation)
* [Remapping](#remapping)
* [Configuration](#configuration)
    * [Template Configuration](#template-configuration)    
    * [Layer Configuration](#layer-configuration)
        * [Ordering Layers](#ordering-layers)    
* [Usage](#usage)
* [Features](#features)
    * [Direct Remapping](#direct-remapping)
    * [Dead Layers](#dead-layers)
    * [Tips on Chords](#tips-on-chords)
    * [Multipress](#multipress)
    * [Inclusive Multipress](#inclusive-multipress)
    * [Mapping Modifier Keys](#mapping-modifier-keys)
* [Compatibility](#compatibility)
* [Contributing](#contributing)
* [Credits](#credits)
* [Additional Resources](#additional-resources)
* [License](#license)


## **Installation**

Installation requires two downloads. K-plus requires having AHK v2 installed to run. While it can later be compiled, it must first be configured which is signifigantly easier with the associated utility scripts included in this repo. 

AHK v2 is currently in beta, but plans to be backward compatible with its current version. You can [download it here](https://www.autohotkey.com/v2/). If this link succumbs to rot, AHK v2 should still be fairly easy to find online. 

With AHK installed, the next step is to clone or download this repo into an appropriate folder. From there, you can move on to configuration without worry. 

After creating a configuration you like, I reccomend compiling the main script `k-plus.ahk` using AHK v2's built-in compiler. This will make the script much easier to move around, though you'll have to recompile when changing the configuration.

## **Remapping**

Although configuring the layers has a lot of flexibility, if all you want is a few layers with remapped keys follow this simplified guide. 

When editing your layers be mindful of semicolons. 

Lines that start with a semicolon are considered commented out, and therefore are not active in the code. Most of these are helpful descriptions, but some are not. The default layer 1, `directory-1.ahk`, contains several lines of commented out code. Delete the semicolon in front of these lines to enable them.

1. Open `template-settings.ini` from the config folder and choose what groups of keys to exclude by setting them to `0`. [Template Configuration](#template-configuration) has more information.   
2. Run `template-generator.ahk` from the config guide, and name it `layer2.ahk`. The first layer has already been assigned to a directory of other layers.  
3. Repeat step 2 for each layer until you have the layers you want. Then edit the new files so that the default action (usually `x`) has been replaced with your desired key, like so:
```
<hotkey>::<remapped key>
```
where
```
q::h
```
remaps the `q` key so it sends the letter `h` instead.  
3. Instead of remapping a hotkey, you can include the  function `toggleLayer(x)` where `x` is your destination layer. Use this to allow yourself to move from one layer to another. I reccomend at least one key on each layer point to the master directory in `directory-1.ahk`. You should also check out/edit the configuration of the directory layer.   
4. Run `detect-config.ahk`.   
5. Run `k-plus`, and check that your layers work.   Congrats! You're done!

## **Configuration**

K-plus is very flexible, but this comes at the cost of complexity in configuration. In order to fully set up your custom layers, it is highly reccomended to first create template layer files. These files, generated by `template-generator.ahk`, provide blueprints for setting up the hotkeys. It is of course possible to write these files entirely yourself, and in places it may even be helpful to do so. However, a base template will make configuration much easier.

Once these config files have been generated you'll need to customize them for your needs. This involves filling out the details of each custom function, or in the case of simple remapping, ensuring that your desired keys are sending the desired outputs in any given layer. 

Finally, config files must be hooked up to the main `k-plus.ahk` script. This part can be done by simply running the `detect-config.ahk` script in the root folder; it will take care of all the details. This script needs to be run each time there are new layers to be found in the `./config/layers` folder. There's no need to run it every time you generate a new layer file, but any files created since the last run will not be included as layers in `k-plus.ahk`.

You can set the folder that k-plus will look to find layers (within the config folder) by adjusting the `layerFolder` setting in `settings.ini` under `[Config Settings]`. This is primarily useful if you want to occasionally swap between different sets of layers, and have created a few folders in `config` that hold your alternate layer setups.

### **Template Configuration**

Configuring the template is primarily done through the `settings.ini` file using the values under the heading `[Template Generator Settings]`. By changing the values on the right hand side of the equals signs, you can choose what kinds of keys you would like to have appear in your template file as well as default actions. 

Below is a full list of the various template generator settings, their possible values, and their meaning. Boolean values are either 0 (excluded), or 1 (included).

`includeMouseButtons`: Boolean. Handles inclusion of mouse specific buttons.  
`includeLetterKeys`: Boolean. Handles inclusion of all letter keys.    
`includeNumberKeys`: Boolean. Handles inclusion of all number keys.    
`includePunctuationKeys`: Boolean. Handles inclusion of all keys dedicated entirely to punctuation or symbols.    
`includeControlKeys`: Boolean. Handles inclusion of keys like `CapsLock`, `Backspace`, `Delete`, etc.    
`includeModifierKeys`: Boolean. Handle inclusion of `Control`, `Alt`, `Shift`, and `Windows` keys as the actual buttons themselves, rather than as modifiers to other keys.  
`includeNavigationKeys`: Boolean. Handles inclusion of keys like `Home`, `PgUp`, the arrow keys, etc.    
`includeNumKeys`: Boolean. Handles inclusion of all numpad keys. Based on the status of Numlock, these behave differently. See AHK docs for more detail.    
`includeMediaKeys`: Boolean. Handles inclusion of media specific keys that handle pressing play, pause, skipping to the next track, and other such specialized commands.    
`includeShift`: Boolean. Handles inclusion of all `Shift+key` hotkeys. Useful for remapping new `Shift` layers.    
`includeShiftRightLeft`: Boolean. Handles inclusion of `Shift` variants specific to either the right `Shift` button or the left. Useful for variable `Shift` layers.    
`includeControl`: Boolean. Handles inclusion of all `Control+key` variants, as per shift    
`includeControlRightLeft`: Boolean. Handles inclusion of right and left variants as per shift.    
`includeAlt`: Boolean. Same as above.    
`includeAltRightLeft`: Boolean. Same as previous right-left variants.    
`includeWindows`: Boolean. Same as previous, however no right-left variant exists for the `Windows` key as distinguishing between them is not supported.    
`includeAltGr`: Boolean. Includes AltGr modifier. However, many keyboards don't have this key.  
`includeWildcard`: Boolean. Includes wildcard modifier, which sends a hotkey regardless of what modifiers are being held down.  
`includeControlShift`: Boolean. Handles the `Ctrl+Shift` combination prefix to hotkeys.  
`includeAltShift`: Boolean. Handles the `Alt+Shift` combination prefix to hotkeys.  
`includeWindowsShift`: Boolean. Handles the `Windows+Shift` combination prefix to hotkeys.  
`includeWindowsAlt`: Boolean. Handles the `Windows+Alt` combination prefix to hotkeys.  
`includeControlAlt`: Boolean. Handles the `Control+Alt` combination prefix to hotkeys.  
`includeControlWindows`: Boolean. Handles the `Control+Windows` combination prefix to hotkeys.  
`includeControlAltShift`: Boolean. Handles the `Control+Alt+Shift` combination prefix to hotkeys.  
`includeControlAltWindows`: Boolean. Handles the `Control+Alt+Windows` combination prefix to hotkeys.  
`additionalKeys`: String (include the value in "double quotes, as demonstrated here"). Seperate the keys you wish to include with a comme, as follows:  
```  
additionalkeys = "x,y,z,CapsLock,a & s"  
```  
This includes the keys listed as their own entries in the template file. Useful for when you don't wish to include an entire group (such as all letters or all media keys), but don't want to create the objects manually. Note that the last entry is a chord, requiring you to press `a` and `s` together to trigger the hotkey.
`additionalModifiers`: String (include the value in "double quotes, as demonstrated here"). Seperate any desired modifier keys with a comma, as above. Modifier keys effectively add another sublayer that behaves like `Shift` to the layer. It creates a chord in the following format: `modifierKey & everyOtherKey`, for every key otherwise included in the template file. Thus, an additional modifier layer.  
`defaultAction`: A function call or single key. Adds the contents of the string to the single line hotkey as so:  
```  
<hotkey>::<defaultAction>  
```  
`defaultFunction`: String (include the value in "double quotes, as demonstrated here"). This details the default actions placed inside the hotkey object's function. Do not add typical function wrappings like `()=>{}`. Instead simply paste the code you would put inside the function, using `` `n `` to create line breaks. As an example:   
`universalDirectoryKey`: String. This optional entry, if set to a specific key, will always set that key to toggle back to layer 1, the directory layer. Useful when generating multiple templates.  
`deadLayer`: Boolean. If true, the template generated will be treated like a dead layer, and an additional `toggleLayer(previousLayer)` function call will be added to each hotkey to toggle the layer back after any key is pressed.  
`multipress`: Boolean. Handles whether or not to include formatted code allowing for a distinction between a single, double, or triple keypress (400 ms delay max). Cannot be used with inclusiveMultipress.  
`inclusiveMultipress`: Boolean. Handles whether or not to include formatted code allowing for a distinction between a single or double press (400 ms delay max), that always sends the single press action. Cannot be used with regular multipress.  
`formatted`: Boolean. Determines whether or not the hotkey objects are on a single line, or formatted for readability. Turning formatting on makes it easier to add custom functions, especially multiline functions, to each hotkey object. However, it makes it more difficult to quickly scan several hotkeys at once, or easily change a single variable in each (as per remapping)    
`defaultFolder`: String. Sets the default folder for saving a template. Useful when generating multiple template layers.  

If you are ever unsure how to represent a particular key, or what a particular hotkey represents you can check out the [AHK v2 docs](https://lexikos.github.io/v2/docs/KeyList.htm) for the full list of keys and key codes.

### **Layer Configuration**

Once you've generated a layer template, or all your layer templates, you'll want to fill them out and ensure they are properly ordered. 

There are generally two ways to go about this. By default, the templates assigns each hotkey the letter `x`. If you're only goal is to remap keys for convenience across different layers, then all you need do is replace the `x` with whatever key you wish. As always, the [AHK v2 docs](https://lexikos.github.io/v2/docs/KeyList.htm) have a full list of keys you can rebind.

You'll also want to make sure some hotkeys are attached to the `toggleLayer(number)` function, so that you can appropriately swap between layers.

The alternative is to define your own functions, as per the AHK scripting language. In this case, I reccomend simply reading the docs and testing out your functions seperately before including them in your layer. Once configured, layers should work like a charm. 

#### **Ordering Layers**
Ensuring your layer files are appropriately ordered is simple. When you generate a layer, make sure you input the appropriate layer number into the dialogue box that pops up. 

Later, if you want to change the layer number you can edit the first line of the layer file so that `currentLayer` equals the layer number you wish.

For the sake of clarity, I reccomend including the layer number in the filename along with whatever else you wish to name the layer. 

**IMPORTANT:** Do not include spaces in your layer name. Other symbols are fine, but spaces cause issues with the config detector script and will likely result in errors.

## **Usage**

Using k-plus for complex layer arrangments requires a little more than just configuring your template files and filling in your hotkeys.

The main issue, especially if you have several layers, is handling the navigation between them. There are three main ways to navigate to a given layer.
1. You can set a hotkey to the `toggleLayer(<layer number>)` function, where `<layer number>` is replaced with the destination layer number. That will let you move directly from one layer to another predetermined layer. 
2. You can set a hotkey to the `toggleLayer(previousLayer)` function. That will let you move from your current layer to your previous layer.  
3. And you can set a hotkey to the `toggleLayer(1)` function. That will let you move from your current layer to the directory layer, where you can then select any of your layers. 

The directory layer is key to managing multiple complex layers. In theory, it should contain only hotkeys that toggle you to another layer, and contain a hotkey for every layer you have. In practice you may have to uncomment some lines (delete the preceding semicolon).

While using a directory requires more keypresses to navigate layers (at least two, compared to the first two options), I strongly reccomend keeping at least one key on every layer that sends you back to the directory layer. Firstly, it allows for infrequently used but occasionally desirable swaps between layers not directly connected. Secondly, if you have a lot of layers it is easier to use a single map than try to create custom hotkeys on every layer pointing to every layer. 

I also reccomend that this key be in the same position for every layer, since that will make it much easier to develop muscle memory. The `universalDirectoryKey` setting in `settings.ini` is helpful for setting that default directory key in every generated template.

It's also inadvisable to wholly remap your control keys and mouse buttons when starting out. Remapping those while you are still experimenting with layers makes it easy to get in a situation where some error is thrown (such as in a custom function) and you can't actually navigate to the error window because all your mouse buttons, `Tab`, and `Enter` keys simply send the letter `x` (the default action).

However, if you do find yourself in a similar situation, I have included universal quit and suspend keys. by default these are `Ctrl+Alt+Windows+Shift+q` and `Ctrl+Alt+Windows+Shift+s` respectively. These can be changed in `settings.ini` of course, but by default template generators do not include all possible modifier combinations to avoid conflicts with these default shortcuts.

Additionally, when generating your templates I highly reccomend copy and pasting the specific sections you want. For example, if you want to add multipress options to just a few keys, generate a template layer with multipress for that key group, copy the keys you want, and paste them into your actual layer file, replacing the defaults for the keys there.

You can stitch together templates like this for greater customizability.

Hotkeys not included in layer will 'fall through', defaulting to their registry mappings. Usually this will be the normal QWERTY keyboard, unless you've made specific changes. You can change this default behavior by remapping keys to the keyword `Return`, which will effectively disable a key entirely in a given layer.

Finally, by default hotkeys are sent with an input level of 1. This means that they are capable of triggerings hotkeys and hotstrings in other scripts with a lower input level (if no input level is specified in a script, the level is 0). So when pressing the hotkey `a` to trigger the hotkey `h`, any other scripts that have a hotkey of `h` will be triggered. 

If you have scripts with higher input levels, you can edit k-plus directly to change the default input level. Otherwise, k-plus is meant to act for most people as a replacement keyboard layout that can directly interface with your other AHK scripts as if you weren't using a layer script and the keys showing up on the screen were the physical keys you were pressing.

## **Features**

K-plus has a lot of features that can be accessed via `settings.ini`. However, each and every feature here is simply something you can do with AutoHotKey itself, and so their [official docs](https://lexikos.github.io/v2/docs/AutoHotkey.htm) are a much better source of support and ideas for what you can make your layers do.

Below I have included some of the core features I believe will be central to anyone using multiple layers, but these should not be taken as an exahustive list, merely suggestions about what you can do with k-plus without too much effort.

### **Previous Layer**

K-plus keeps a record of your last layer. This is to enable dead layers toggling back to your previous layer and enable keys set to `toggleLayer(previousLayer)` to send you back to your last used layer.

In the `settings.ini` file, the `ignoreLayerAsPreviousLayer` option can be set to a layer that is never recorded as the previous layer. If this is set to 1 (usually the directory layer), you can swap from, for example, layer 4 to the directory and then to layer 5, then use a toggle-to-previous-layer hotkey to move back to layer 4. 

If, as reccomended, you have a key on every layer that points to the directory, it provides no benefit to toggle to the previous layer when the previous layer is the directory. Thus, you can exclude it from consideration.

The setting can be set to any number, so if you prefer to have your directory be a layer other than 1, you can still set it up to be skipped easily.

### **Direct Remapping**

The easiest way to use k-plus is direct remapping. Direct remapping looks like this: `a::h`, and is the default way to use k-plus. 

In the previous example, `a` is remapped to `h`. Remapping in this way also remaps modifier combinations, which is extremely useful. So `Ctrl+a` will function identically to `Ctrl+h` and capitalization will work as expected.

You can read the full details [here](https://lexikos.github.io/v2/docs/misc/Remap.htm).

### **Dead Layers**

Dead layers are how k-plus implements dead keys. For those unfamiliar, dead keys do nothing when pressed, but the subsequent key has an altered function. For example, the English international keyboard uses the apostrophe key as a dead key to produce diacritical marks over specific letters.

K-plus also allows you to create custom dead keys by linking them to a custom dead layer. In short, the dead key toggles to a new dead layer where each key does some custom function (like produce a special letter variant), and then toggles back to the previous layer. 

This can be handy for symbols or punctuation layers, where you only want to send a single punctuation mark before automatically returning to your usual letters. 

The template generator can automatically make a layer 'dead' via the appropriate setting. You can create as many dead layers as you wish, as long as you can keep track of how to navigate to them.

### **Tips on Chords**

AHK happily supports custom key combinations. A custom cumbo takes the following form: `key1 & key2::<output event>`. AHK does not support more than two keys in combination at a time. 

A custom combination disables the usual function of `key1` in order to prevent unwanted inputs when using the combination. However, this can be overridden by specificying a hotkey for `key1`. 

While you can add custom combinations to a layer manually or by including the combos in the `additionalKeys` setting, you can also include keys in the `additional modifier` settings. This will generate a custom combination for each key you include + every other key on the keyboard included in your template. 

Custom combinations do not support prefix modifiers, so you cannot chord together `Ctrl+Alt+z+y` for example.

A custom modifier is useful for generating a new shift-like layer within a layer.

### **Multipress**

K-plus includes a special setting for multipress detection. Turning this option on in the settings attatches a piece of code to every hotkey which distinguishes between single, double, and triple presses. You can fill in custom functions to send keys or perform other tasks under each option.

Multipress works by waiting 400ms for a new keypress and keeping track of the number of keypresses in a row. That means if you want a single press function to trigger, there is a 400ms delay while the script checks to make sure you aren't actualy trying to input a double press.

That makes multipress an inconvenient option for rapid keyboard inputs or even quick toggling between layers. However, for uses like running a specific program or complex functions you use infrequently and don't require immediate subsequent key presses, it is an excellent option.

### **Inclusive Multipress**

Inclusive multipress works similarly to multipress, adding a new batch of code with slots for custom functions. However, there are a few key differences. 

Firstly, it only distinguishes between single and double presses, triple press support is not present at this time. 

More importantly, when pressing an inclusive multipress key the single press option always fires. If the single press option has the key send the character `x`, while the double press option sends the character `y`, then the actual behaviour of a double press will be to first send `x`, then on the second press send `y`. 

This can be inconvient, but inclusive multipress has been included in k-plus for a few reasons.

It's much more responsive than regular multipress, requiring no delay before action is taken. 

For sending characters, one can set the double press action to backspace the previously typed character before sending the appropriate character. 

And modifier keys can be set up with inclusive multipress since a single press of, for example, Shift, usually does nothing anyway. 

### **Mapping Modifier Keys**

If you'd like, you can also remap modifier keys so that they retain their normal function when holding them down, but produce a new result or character when tapped. To do this, use the following format: 
```
modifierKey::SendInput("customCharacter")/customFunction
modifierKey & <Any other Key>::<Any custom function or character> 
```
By creating a custom combination with the modifier key, the modifiers native function is restored. See the docs for [more information](https://lexikos.github.io/v2/docs/HotkeyFeatures.htm#easy-to-reach).

It is important that when remapping modifier keys you do not use the direct remapping format of `modifierKey::outputCharacter`. This format can cause issues, occasionally even across layers for reasons I do not understand. 

Notably, directly remapping a key in this way prevents you from defining custom combinations of modifier keys like `Ctrl+Shift`. You can define a hotkey as `Ctrl+key` or `Shift+key`, but not `Ctrl+Shift+Key` or any other combinations. This interferes with the default universal quit and suspend hotkeys.

## **Compatibility**

K-plus is built entirely with AHK, which means that it inherits the issues AHK has. These are extensive, and several are buried in the AHK documentation. 

Notably, AHK does not play well with video games, so sadly the reliability of layers in games cannot be guaranteed. While layers would be nice, I reccomend simply suspending or quitting the app during gameplay and relying on your base keyboard layout. Since games usually demand positional keyboard memory rather than specific letters (or typing), the only issue this causes is a lack of the options layers usually provide, which can't be helped.

Additionally, `Alt+Tab` has unusual behaviour in AHK scripts. If you wish to rebind the `Alt+Tab` function and `Alt+Shift+Tab`, I reccomend following the [official guidance found here](https://lexikos.github.io/v2/docs/Hotkeys.htm#alttab). The most important issue is that `Alt+Tab` remappings are **not** affected by `#HotIf`, and so can't be assigned to specific layers with k-plus. 

Lastly, numpad keys behave differently depending on whether or not `NumLock` is engaged, and with `Ctrl` pressed, pressing `Pause` produces `CtrlBreak` and `NumLock` produces `Pause`. AHK reccomends using `^CtrlBreak` in hotkeys instead of `^Pause`, where the `^` prefix stands in for Ctrl.

If you encounter unexpected compatability issues, I reccomend checking out the source code and the [AHK v2 docs](https://lexikos.github.io/v2/docs/AutoHotkey.htm). You can also open an issue.

## **Contributing and Future Development**

Feel free to fork/create a pull request to fix bugs, refactor code, or add new featues. While I aimed to create something flexible and easy to configure, I'm not a master of AHK and there's certainly room for improvement.

In particular, the settings for creating template layers must be edited manually, and would benefit from some GUI controls. Morevoer, there may be more efficient ways of formatting and setting up the templates, or making it easier to navigate them to fill in functions as desired.

Currently, k-plus does not support hotstrings. While you can of course generate your own hotstring scripts or custom add hotstrings to a layer, there is no built in generator for hotstrings, hotstring options, or hotstring end characters. Adding this functionality in a clean and convenient way is a probable area of future development.

Another area for improvement is implementing k-plus in a way that allows for layerd `Alt+Tab` and other hotkeys unaffected by `#HotIf` would be great. A possible avenue here is looping through an array of objects when switching between layers for these special remappings.

Finally, developing new layers can be very useful, but k-plus does not include a convenient way to refrence the keybindings of a particular layer. Developing a script to create a refrence map for a layer would be beneficial, as printing out a keyboard layout and penciling in your options can be inconvenient.

Other fixes, suggestions, improvements, and additional features are welcome.

## **Credits**

The AHK software and docs have been invaluable to making K-Plus work.

In addition, [DreymaR's Extend layer](https://github.com/DreymaR/BigBagKbdTrixPKL) layout has been used as one of the suggested default layers (with some modifications), and I highly reccomend checking out the Extend layers in general if you aren't already familiar.

## **Additional Resources**

K-plus is a useful tool, but it was designed to serve a single individual's needs. DreymaR's Extend layer is a modifier-based program with a great deal more versatility than k-plus. Although it lacks layer toggling (its one major flaw) it does come with a GUI, support for a variety of keyboard layouts, an active community with active developers, and many more features (like powerstrings, chords, and more advanced dead keys) than I could create. I reccomend checking it out for more details. 

I also have to reccomend [kmonad](https://github.com/kmonad/kmonad), an incredibly flexible layer program designed to work (to one degree or another) on Linux, Windows, and Mac. While the tool is less actively developed, it includes a wider variety of features including layer toggling, dead keys, chords, powerstrings, modifier-based layers, and variable key functions depending on how the key is pressed (double-tapped, held vs tapped, etc.). While support seems to be primarily focused on Linux systems, kmonad truly offers it all, though it comes with a comparable amount of configuration to set up even simple layers. Definately give it a whirl if you lean more towards 'poweruser'.

## **[License](./LICENSE)**
This program uses the open-source MIT License.

--- 